1	INTRODUCTION
=====

Artificial intelligence (AI) systems have become a reality and affect our lives in many important ways. Data are at the core of artificial intelligence and machine learning (AI-ML) models; they are the main resource which enables AI-ML models to learn and evolve, allowing them to solve classification, prediction and anomaly detection tasks. Collecting, preparing and manag- ing the data assets needed to train and deploy effective AI-ML models is a challenge. It is important that performance is achieved while making sure that AI-ML models abide by data protection regulations. Data usage is a fundamental aspect to consider when AI-ML systems are designed, imple- mented and operationalised. Being aware of data management problems allows organisations and individuals to understand and follow how their data are collected, transmitted, stored, processed and exploited by AI-ML- powered systems. Anyone who plans to implement such systems should be fully aware of all challenges related to data management in order to ensure consistent and sustainable AI-ML deployment.

This document is for data owners and organisations wishing to adopt and deploy AI-ML models using these data. It discusses how data assets are used in the AI-ML models’ life cycle and highlights the best practices for using them.

Throughout the document, the term data will be used to define the rep- resentation of facts, measurements and various other types of information, while the term data asset will designate the incarnation of data in a format that is suitable for management, storage and processing within information and communication technology (ICT) systems. The document presents data management practices starting from the life cycle of AI-ML models that rely on such data. Indeed, one of the most common pitfalls is to use data that are not suitable for a given stage of AI-ML model development, or data that are not suitable at all, and then expect reasonable performance. It is impor- tant to realise that increasing data quantity does not usually mitigate the problem of having low-quality data. As an introduction to the overall data landscape, the next section provides a short introduction to data types. Then the chapter describes a reference life cycle for AI-ML models, which will be used throughout the document to map data assets to AI-ML models’ development stages, explain the role of the data assets and describe the best practices for their collection and management.
